Both vegetable and fruit consumption contribute to wellness and disease prevention. Most dietary health messages promote both together and position the word “fruits” before “vegetables.” We examined the word order of the commonly used phrase “fruits and vegetables” through linguistics, psychology, botany, nutrition, health outcomes, and current US intake to determine if the common word order best presents these two foods in health messaging. By comparing the 10 most commonly consumed vegetables versus fruits, we found that vegetables scored higher on the Aggregate Nutrient Density Index and contained fewer calories and more fiber than fruits. Among the “nutrients of public concern” listed in the 2015 Dietary Guidelines for Americans, we determined that vegetables are better sources of these nutrients than fruits, although fruits scored higher in antioxidant content. In observational cohort studies, vegetable and fruit consumption was found to be associated with decreased mortality. Finally, daily intakes of both vegetables and fruits are lower than recommended, but the discrepancy is larger for vegetables specially among children suggesting a greater imperative to promote vegetables. For these reasons, future health messages promoting both together should intentionally “vegetables” first to promote intake and emphasize their importance regarding contribution to health.

Increasing both vegetable and fruit intake is a nearly universal dietary recommendation. Prioritizing one over the other to optimize health could be based on nutrient density or other nutrient quality scores. These scores can be a useful way to distinguish which foods pack the most nutritional punch.

Two scores that have been used to rank foods are the Aggregate Nutrient Density Index (ANDI) and NuVal scores. The ANDI score divides the total nutrients in the food by the number of calories per serving; it includes 35 vitamins and minerals as well as other nutrients such as fiber, antioxidants, phytosterols, angiogenesis inhibitors, and resistant starches in its algorithm.27 The ANDI score ranges from 1 to 1000, with 1000 being the most nutritious. The NuVal Score is based on an algorithm of the Overall Nutritional Quality Index to measure 30 different nutrients (including vitamins, minerals, bioflavonoids, and carotenoids), protein quality, fat quality, glycemic load, and energy density. The NuVal score rates foods from 1 to 100, with 100 being the most nutritious.28 Unlike the ANDI score, the NuVal score also detracts for trans fat, cholesterol, saturated fat, sodium, and sugar.

Comparison of the ANDI scores for the top 10 consumed vegetables and fruits are shown in Table 2. Carrots rooted out the most nutrients of the vegetables at 458, whereas strawberries topped the fruits at a juicy 182. Overall, vegetables significantly outperformed fruits: 227 ± 50 versus 74 ± 15 (mean ± SEM); P = 0.014. The NuVal scoring system gives all whole plant foods near perfect scores. Therefore, all the vegetables and fruits included in the analyses had nearly identical NuVal scores (all >90) and are not shown in the table.

Currently, there appears to be a shift in public health messages around vegetable and fruit consumption. Whereas the normative ordering of this pair of food groups for decades has been “fruits and vegetables,” there are now many examples of health messages referring to “vegetables and fruits.” We have asked the question as to what rhyme or reason might justify one order versus the other, and many possible perspectives were considered.

Linguistically there are general principles of ordering binomials that suggest reasons of sound and syllable to support starting with fruits. But, as health professionals and scientists, we feel that other factors are relevant and should be applied. We dove into the botanical weeds to acknowledge the bounty of anatomical confusion between the two. This would surely incline one to use them together in any health message for the practical purpose of grounding reason in science. Using the cognitive psychology of word order, a phrase that is less familiar increases the cognitive load needed to process the anomalous word order, and it tends to become more deeply embedded into the memory; this could argue for switching to vegetables first to promote more people to think about both vegetables and fruits and keep them in mind. Nutritionally, when considering energy density and nutrient density, whereas both food groups beat all packaged processed junk foods to a pulp, there was a trend for vegetables to edge out fruits. Summarizing available observational cohort studies that reported on associations between vegetable or fruit intakes and mortality, the strength of the evidence was slightly more consistent in supporting vegetable intake. Finally, citing current data on American consumption patterns relative to national recommendations, we found a larger gap in vegetable versus fruit intake, which adds greater urgency to emphasizing vegetables first.

Overall, we do find that there are several rationales for referring to this duo as “vegetables and fruits,” rather than “fruits and vegetables.” However, we would not be so bold as to suggest that reversing the trajectory of diet-related chronic diseases depends on getting this order correct. In fact, we strongly believe that meaningful health impacts from dietary changes will require large increases in both vegetable and fruit intake—larger than have been accomplished in recent decades. It is hoped that messaging strategies, such as the USDA transition from the Food Pyramid to MyPlate, will affect behavior change by simply framing half the plate as ideally coming from these two important food groups. Given the disparities between current intakes and recommendations, public health professionals will need to do more to close the gaps for both food groups. But when it comes to vegetables and fruits, we conclude that there is good reason to use “vegetables and fruits” as the word order of choice in public health messaging.